NSA: Neuro-symbolic ARC Challenge
Paweł Batorski1
Jannik Brinkmann2
Paul Swoboda1
pawel.batorski@hhu.de
jannik.brinkmann@uni-mannheim.de
paul.swoboda@hhu.de
1Heinrich Heine Universit¨at D¨usseldorf
2University of Mannheim
Train
Inputs
Train
 Outputs
 
Prediction
Test Input
Proposed
 transformations
primitives
Search in the
 space of proposed 
transformations
Found transformation 
primitives and 
parameters
Figure 1. An overview of the NSA framework: Starting with input-output pairs, a transformer model is utilized to propose potential
transformation primitives. These are then feed to the symbolic combinatorial search (ARGA [27]), which identifies the correct overall
transformation and corresponding parameters solving the task for the given training input-output pairs. Finally, the selected transformation
is applied to the test input to generate the final prediction.
Abstract
The Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (ARC) evaluates
general reasoning capabilities that are difficult for both
machine learning models and combinatorial search meth-
ods. We propose a neuro-symbolic approach that combines
a transformer for proposal generation with combinatorial
search using a domain-specific language. The transformer
narrows the search space by proposing promising search di-
rections, which allows the combinatorial search to find the
actual solution in short time. We pre-train the trainsformer
with synthetically generated data. During test-time we gen-
erate additional task-specific training tasks and fine-tune
our model. Our results surpass comparable state of the art
on the ARC evaluation set by 27% and compare favourably
on the ARC train set. We make our code and dataset pub-
licly available at https://github.com/Batorskq/NSA.
1. Introduction
The Abstraction and Reasoning Corpus (ARC) chal-
lenge [7] is a difficult few-shot benchmark for testing visual
reasoning capabilities of machine learning models. The ca-
pabilities of recent general-purpose LLM systems are, as of
now, not good enough to solve ARC at human performance
in a reasonably limited amount of time [19, 20, 28]. Ar-
guably their pre-training seems to have not imbued them
with enough of the necessary concepts required to solve
ARC tasks reliably and without an excessive number of
tries. It is unclear whether LLMs lack the correct level of
abstraction and the specific type of high-level visual reason-
ing used for solving visual riddles. On the other hand, spe-
cialized combinatorial search methods using domain spe-
cific languages (DSL) [2, 11, 17, 27] struggle with the great
variety and generality of the ARC tasks, with no compact
enough description of the search space being available to
effectively solve the problem via traditional methods. At
the same time, tasks in the ARC benchmark are not hard for
humans, with most tasks seemingly requiring only some vi-
arXiv:2501.04424v1  [cs.AI]  8 Jan 2025

Train Sample 1
Train Sample 2
Train Sample 3
Test Sample
Transformations to solve the task: extract, update_color
Train Sample 1
Train Sample 2
Train Sample 3
Transformations to solve the task: extract, duplicate
Test Sample
Train Sample 1
Train Sample 2
Train Sample 3
Test Sample
Transformations to solve the task: upscale_grid
Train Sample 2
Train Sample 3
Test Sample
Transformations to solve the task: update_color
Train Sample 1
Train Sample 4
DSL Rep.
Capacity
Effective
Capacity
ARGA
✗
✗
ARGAe
✓
✗
NSA
✓
✓
Figure 2. Input-output pairs and a test image from selected ARC tasks, each with a distinct transformation challenge. Our solution is
illustrated for each task. ARGA cannot solve any of the first three tasks since it cannot represent the needed transformation. Our extended
DSL ARGAe has the representational capacity but can run into time-out during search and thus cannot find it effectively in practice. For the
bottom right task ARGA can represent the transformation theoretically but neither ARGA nor ARGAe can find it due to a time-out during
search. Necessary transformation primitives absent in ARGA’s DSL are marked in red: extract, duplicate, and upscale grid. In contrast,
transformations present in ARGA’s original DSL, like update color, are highlighted in blue. For the tasks in the upper right and lower
left corner all necessary transformation primitives are missing in ARGA, while for the upper left one transformation primitive is present
and another is lacking. NSA addresses this dilemma by proposing the necessary transformation primitives to explore during combinatorial
search.
sual pattern matching and a limited amount of reasoning. In
user studies, human participants solved around 80% of the
tasks on average [15].
This indicates that (i) currently pure pre-trained ML sys-
tems are not yet capable of solving ARC with reasonably
limited compute and may lack some fundamental capabili-
ties to do so and (ii) specialized combinatorial approaches
relying on DSLs cannot cope with the search space com-
plexity. However, both approaches can be used to capture
some aspects of humans solving ARC tasks well: DSLs can
be used for reasoning on the right abstraction level in terms
of composing elementary transformations. ML can be used
to pick promising transformation candidates, mimicking the
intuitive way a human will restrict his reasoning instead
of enumerating all possible transformations. We propose
a neuro-symbolic approach to solving ARC that combines
these strengths of ML and DSL-based combinatorial meth-
ods. In our approach the DSLs give us valuable inductive
bias that allows us to reason on the right abstraction level,
while the ML part guides the search process by proposal
generation, allowing the combinatorial search to actually
find solutions in a limited amount of time.

To train our neuro-symbolic approach, the provided
ARC training data is not enough. The training set consists
of only 400 tasks, mostly with three or four input/output
pairs each. Due to this limited training data, we syntheti-
cally generate more training data to pre-train and test-time
fine-tune our proposal generation transformer.
Our empirical results indicate that our combined ap-
proach can surpass pure ML- and combinatorial methods.
Contributions:
In detail, our contributions are
DSL: We extend the DSL from [27] to increase its rep-
resentational capacity, enabling it to solve significantly
more ARC tasks.
Transformer-Guided Neuro-Symbolic Search: We train
a transformer model to suggest suitable transformation
primitives that restrict the search process. We pre-train
our model on a large set of ARC tasks synthetically gen-
erated by hind-sight relabeling. During inference time,
we fine-tune our model by again synthetically generating
ARC tasks using only the currently considered task im-
ages. The transformer then generates proposals that are
fed to the combinatorial DSL search.
Experiments: We demonstrate the efficacy of our ap-
proach on the ARC train and evaluation set. On the eval-
uation set we outperform comparable baselines, i.e. the
pure DSL methods [2, 11, 27] model as well as recent
ML approaches [5, 19].
2. Related Work
The ARC challenge [7] was proposed to benchmark gen-
eral reasoning capabilities that seem easy for humans but
hard for current ML methods and hand-crafted search al-
gorithms. It has lead to a large number of attempts using
various paradigms for its solution. To spur progress, leader-
boards have been made available that measure performance
of submitted systems. For inclusion in the primary leader-
board, the model may not call any outside or proprietary
LLM and a 30-minute computation time limit for each task
must be obeyed. For models that do not adhere to these
requirements, a secondary leaderboard can be used.
We categorize related work on solving the ARC chal-
lenge into learning based and DSL-based approaches and
also discuss simpler alternatives to full ARC.
2.1. ML
The work [28] analyzes one-shot prompting of large lan-
guage models (LLMs) for ARC Challenge problems. The
authors examine the performance of LLaMA 2 [24] and
GPT-4 [1] with various grid representations to address
ARC tasks. By applying few-shot and in-context few-shot
prompting, they solve only 13 tasks from a chosen subset
of ARC tasks that can be easily addressed by the DSL ap-
proach in [27]. However, incorporating the abstract graph
reasoning proposed in [27] improves their results, enabling
them to solve 23 out of 50 tasks. While this graph abstrac-
tion significantly enhances the LLMs’ reasoning capabili-
ties on ARC tasks, the overall performance remains far be-
low the results achieved with simple abstraction-based rea-
soning alone. The work [20] explores various methods of
representing ARC images in LLMs.
The work [16] uses a differential neural computer to
solve ARC problems with a grid size of up to 10 × 10. The
approach [4] uses DreamCoder [9] for solving a small sub-
set of ARC tasks. An imitation learning algorithm based on
the decision transformer [6] and a custom clustering method
is used in [23] for solving small ARC tasks. Due to scaling
or representational capacity issues the above works are all
applied to small subsets of ARC and do not aim to solve the
full ARC dataset.
The works [19] and [26] use pre-trained LLMs for di-
rectly outputting the transformation of the test input image
when conditioned on each task’s input output pairs. Green-
blatt’s pure LLM method [12] used GPT-4o [22] and few-
shot prompting to sample python programs for describing
ARC transformations. For each task up to 8000 programs
are sampled. While achieving impressive results, this puts
the approach outside the evaluation protocol of using 30
minutes per task and not using a closed source LLM. The vi-
sion transformer [8]-based work [18] uses the spatial image
structure and trains on procedurraly generated tasks [14].
However, an evaluation on the ARC train or eval set is miss-
ing.
The closest work to ours is [5], which uses a large lan-
guage model fine-tuned on code generation to write pro-
grams using the DSL [13]. Similar to us, the transformer is
fine-tuned using synthetically generated training data using
hindsight relabeling. In contrast to us, the DSL [13] does
not come with a combinatorial search, hence relying for the
full search process on the ML model. Also, since the used
transformer is several orders of magnitude larger than ours,
test time adaptation is not possible to do, thus relying more
on the capabilities of their pre-trained model.
The concurrent work [3] proposes, similarly to us, to
use test-time training for ARC. They use an 8B-parameter
LLM, but due to the great computational demands this work
does not allow for 30-minute per task inference.
2.2. DSL & Combinatorial
The ARC challenge has inspired several dedicated DSLs for
desribing its transformations, sitting at different levels of
abstraction and representational power.
The graph based approach [27] decomposes a transfor-
mation into a series of filters and transformation primitives,
that together work on a more abstract graph representation.

It comes together with a combinatorial search algorithm that
finds the right overall transformation. In its basic form it is
somewhat limited in its representational power by a small
set of elementary transformation primitives, since otherwise
the combinatorial search would have difficulties traversing
a larger search space.
Ainosoon et al [2] propose an imperative style DSL for
ARC and tasks are solved through bread-first depth search
on a search tree.
The work [17] introduces a novel DSL inspired by [27]
and frames the ARC Challenge as a generalized planning
problem. By incorporating graph abstraction [27], their so-
lution prunes actions extensively to streamline the search
process. Their approach closely resembles ours. However,
while we expand the DSL to support a broader search space,
their extension remains minimal, likely due to challenges in
finding correct solutions as the search space grows. Addi-
tionally, they evaluate their solution on only a small subset
of ARC tasks.
The work [11] provides a DSL written as functional pro-
grams in OCaml and searches heuristically for solutions
using minimum description length as quality criterion. It
reaches state of the art results for pure DSL-based methods.
Michael Hodel’s DSL [13] decomposes a transformation
into a series of 165 elementary operations. Hand-written
programs are given that can solve all of the 400 ARC train
tasks. However, to describe the most complex transforma-
tions found in the ARC train set, sequences of up to 60 el-
ementary transformations are necessary. This can limit the
practical effectivity of the DSL since such long programs
might be currently too complex for ML models to generate.
2.3. Simplified ARC Benchmarks
Due to the complexity of the original ARC benchmark pro-
posed by [7], several authors recommend first focusing on
simpler tasks, as some of the original ARC tasks are chal-
lenging even for humans. The work in [28] introduces the
1D-ARC benchmark, which simplifies ARC tasks by re-
ducing them to one dimension, making object association
easier to analyze by limiting relationships to right-left inter-
actions. Meanwhile, [21] presents ConceptARC, designed
to simplify ARC tasks so that nearly all are easily solvable
by humans, maintaining two-dimensional images but with
an average human success rate of 95%. Although our pa-
per does not include evaluations on these simplified ARC
benchmarks, it underscores the difficulty of the original
ARC tasks.
3. Method
Our method consists of three parts.
DSL: The domain-specific language (DSL) for encoding
image transformations.
Proposal Generation: We train a transformer model to
predict which specific transformations in the DSL need to
be used to get the input/output relationships on the few-
shot examples of the current task,
Combinatorial Search: for finding the exact subset and
order of transformations and their parameters.
Our methodological contribution lies in (i) extending
ARGA’s DSL by additional transformation primitives, en-
larging its representational capacity.
(ii) Introducing a
transformer-guided search via proposing transformation
primitives.
(iii) Generating synthetic training examples
by hindsight relabeling for pre-training and test-time fine-
tuning the transformer.
3.1. DSL & Symbolic Engine
We use the “Abstract Reasoning with Graph Abstractions”
(ARGA) DSL from [27]. The ARGA DSL consists of three
main objects: (i) abstract representations, (ii) filters and
(iii) transformation primitives.
Abstract representations describe the input images in
terms of a more abstract graphical structure. ARGA as-
sociates connected components of the input pixel grids
w.r.t. different connectivity criteria as graph nodes. For
example, a node might be a same-color 4-connected sub-
set of the pixel grid. Edges are added according to various
spatial proximity criteria. Note that there can be multiple
abstract representations of the same image. In Figure 3
we show two different graph abstractions of the same im-
age.
Filters select certain nodes in the abstraction graph. Possi-
ble filter operations are to select by size, color, neighbor-
hood relations etc.
Transformation primitives modify input nodes selected
by filters. Exemplary transformation primitives are up-
date color of a node, rotate, extend by appending addi-
tional pixels in some directions etc.
Thus, a full transformation consists of choosing the used
abstraction, a sequence of filters and filter parameters and a
sequence of transformation primitives and their parameters.
An example of a full transformation is included in Figure 3
ARGA provides 4 base filters out of the box. More com-
plex filters can be constructed by composing basic ones.
Additionally, 12 transformation primitives are given.
We add 15 more generic and widely usable transforma-
tion primitives and call the resulting DSL extended ARGA,
or abbreviate as ARGAe. The list of additional transforma-
tion primitives is given in Table 1.
Remark. Importantly, increasing ARGA’s representational
capacity by adding more transformation primitives might

Size=6
Size=4
Connected components of non-black pixels by color
Size=1
Size=2
Size=1
Size=2
Size=2
Size=2
Vertically connected components of non-background pixels by color
Filter: filter_by_color
Filter Parameters: Color=Red, Exclude=False
Transformation: move_node_max
Transformation Parameters: Direction=To the
object of color Light Gray
Figure 3. Two distinct abstractions of the same grid. The upper abstraction groups adjacent pixels of the same color as a single node,
while the bottom abstraction groups vertically adjacent components as a single node. Each abstraction also uses a different method for
associating nodes within the graph. The image includes the filter, filter parameters, transformation, and transformation parameters needed
to achieve the desired output. Note that the choice of abstraction is crucial, since the bottom abstraction will not lead to a correct solution.
1. fill_rectangle
2. rotate_grid
3. no_trans 
1. beam
2. no_trans
3. no_trans
All training 
examples 
from 
a
task
Outputs after 
random transformations
Figure 4. Hindsight relabeling example: Starting with the original
input, we sample abstractions, filters, filter parameters, transfor-
mations and transformation parameters. We apply them to the grid,
generating new input-output pairs with the corresponding transfor-
mation. The labeled pair is added to the transformer’s training set.
make it worse in practice. Since more transformation prim-
itives mean a larger search space to traverse, some solu-
tions found previously by ARGA’s combinatorial search on
the smaller base set of transformation primitives might not
be found on the enlarged set. This arguably is one of the
reasons why [27] did not include a larger set of transfor-
mation primitives.
Combinatorial Search
ARGA implements a greedy
best-first search for traversing a search tree. Each search
tree node corresponds to a set of graphs that were obtained
by a partial transformation of the input images. Search tree
nodes are expanded in the order of ascending distance to
the output images. Transformations are pruned by choosing
constraints which they are not allowed to violate. Hashing
is used to detect different transformations that result in the
same update on the considered images. A taboo list is used
to suppress exploring transformations that have not led to
Transformation
Primitive
Description
extract
Extract a node
duplicate
Duplicate a grid a number of times
along an axis
upscale grid
Multiply grid size by a factor and ex-
pand every pixel accordingly
fill
Fill a subgrid with a specified object
magnet
Move pixels until they touch a speci-
fied border (either image border or a
node)
beam
Shoot colored line in specific direc-
tions
shift
Shift the grid in a specified direction
mirror duplicate
Duplicate and mirror the grid
rotate duplicate
Duplicate the grid with a specified list
of angles
mirror grid
Mirror the grid along a specified axis
rotate grid
Rotate the grid by a specified angle
connect
Connect two pixels or objects with a
line of a specified color
recolor
Recolor the object to a specified color
truncate
remove specified object and recolor
pixels to background
Table 1. Additional transformation primitives in ARGAe.
better results.
3.2. Transformer-Guided Search
To guide the search process, we train a transformer to gen-
erate transformation primitive proposals. Given several in-
put/output images of a single ARC task, it predicts (i) how
many transformation primitives are used and (ii) which
transformation primitives are used in each step.

Architecture
We
use
a
standard
Transformer-
encoder [25] with a custom tokenizer.
A token is
added for encoding each image color, new image row,
new input image and new output image. We append three
classification tokens for predicting a sequence of up to three
transformations primitives. If fewer than three primitives
are enough, classification tokens can also predict that no
primitive is needed.
For this, the additional no trans
primitive is used. We tested different configurations and
empirically observed that three primitives are sufficient
to solve most ARC tasks that can be represented through
ARGAe.
Synthetic ARC Task Generation
For generating a syn-
thetic task we first randomly sample an ARC task and take
only its input images.
Then we randomly sample a se-
quence of abstractions, filters, filter parameters, transforma-
tion primitives and their parameters. The transformation is
applied on all input images from the sampled task. If on
any input image the transformation did not result in an al-
tered output image, we discard the sampled transformation.
After generating synthetic tasks, we also remove duplicate
tasks. See Figure 4 for an illustration of the data generation
process.
Pre-Training
We pre-train the transformer on 31125 syn-
thetically generated tasks with standard categorical cross-
entropy.
Test-Time Adaptation
During inference time, we gener-
ate additional synthetic training tasks by sampling random
transformations but applying them on the considered input
images only. The pre-trained model is fully fine-tuned.
4. Experiments
In this section we evaluate the effectiveness of our neuro-
symbolic approach on both the train and eval dataset of
ARC [7]. We find that our approach can significantly im-
prove upon comparable sota methods on the ARC evalua-
tion set and that both the neural and symbolic parts of our
approach are necessary for good performance.
Data Generation
We pre-train our model on 31125 arti-
ficially generated training tasks. Input images were taken
from both the train and eval set, similar to the data genera-
tion process from CodeIt [5]. We stress that no ground truth
transformations were seen during training. Roughly 40%
of the generated tasks have one transformation primitive,
another 40% have two and 20% need three. For tasks using
one transformation primitive we balanced the training set so
that each transformation primitive was generated similarly
often.
Architecture & Training Details
Our transformer en-
coder for the proposal generation has 8 layers, 512 feature
dimensions and 2048 feedforward dimensions and 8 atten-
tion heads per layer. This gives 25.3 million parameters
overall. We pre-train for 27 epochs with a learning rate of
5e −5 and batch size 32 using the ADAM optimizer. For
TTA we finetune for 15 epochs with the same parameters.
Our custom tokenizer has a vocabulary size of 45. During
our training we also perform learning rate decay. After ev-
ery 10 epochs we multiply the learning rate by 0.1.
Our Methods
We provide three methods corresponding
to our individual contributions.
ARGAe: The pure ARGA [27] DSL approach with ex-
tended transformation set. We use the provided combi-
natorial search algorithm on all possible filters and trans-
formations.
NSA w/o TTA: Using transformer-guided search with
the pre-trained transformer, we predict up to three con-
secutive transformation primitives from ARGAe.
We
have three classification tokens for transformation primi-
tive proposal. If the second one predicts no trans, mean-
ing only one transformation primitive will be needed, we
take the top-5 transformation primitives proposed from
the first classification token and feed it to the search algo-
rithm. If the third classification token predicts no trans,
meaning two transformation primitives are needed to de-
scribe the overall transformation, we feed the top-4 trans-
formation primitives of the first two classification tokens
to the combinatorial search. In the remaining case we
feed the top-3 transformation primitive predictions of
each classification token to the combinatorial search.
NSA: Using transformer-guided grid search with test-time
adaptation, for each task, we fine-tune on 2500 train-
ing samples generated on the given input for 15 epochs.
Other parameters are equal to NSA w/o TTA.
Literature Baselines
We compare against recent SOTA
methods that follow a comparable evaluation protocol, that
is compute is limited to 30 minutes and evaluation is done
on at least some subset of either the ARC train or eval set.
This gives us the original ARGA method [27] and the other
DSL methods [2, 2, 10]. Among the pure ML-based meth-
ods we compare to [19]. Additionally, we compare against
the DSL/LLM method CodeIt [5]. Hence, we do not com-
pare against methods [3, 12, 18] that do not follow this eval-
uation protocol or report results on a different task set.
Some comparable methods from the literature have eval-
uated on subsets of both train and test sets instead of the full
ones for various reasons. For example, CodeIt [5] uses
the train set to choose hyperparameters. ARGA [27] only

evaluates on promising tasks for which the authors think it
has the representational capacity etc. We also believe that
some approaches forego testing on the full train/evaluation
set due to the large time investment this would incur.
Evaluation Protocol
For each task, we allow 30 minutes
of computation time. We report results on each set for com-
parison. For TTA, this includes the time to generate new
data and finetune the model. Most other approaches allow
for trying three transformations and counting only the po-
tentially correct one. In contrast to this, but similar to [19],
we only make one attempt for each task.
Method
ARC Train Set
ARC Eval Set
Ferre [10]
29/400
6/400
Ferre [11]
96/400
23/400
Ainooson MLE [2]
70/400
17/400
Ainooson Brute Force [2]
104/400
26/400
Mirchandani [19]
56/400
27/400
CodeIt [5]
-
59/400
ARGA [27]
50/400
9/400
ARGAe
6/400
22/400
NSA w/o TTA
48/400
63/400
NSA (ours)
78/400
75/400
Table 2. Results on the training and evaluation datasets of ARC
tasks. Best results are colored red, the second best orange, and the
third best yellow.
Results & Discussion
In Table 2 we compare our results
with existing baselines from the literature. We outperform
baselines that follow the ARC evaluation protocol by 27%
on the evaluation set and land on the third place on the ARC
train set. Our best-performing method NSA solves 78 tasks
on the train set, with 104 being solved by [2]. We solve
75 tasks on the eval set, with 59 being solved by the next-
best approach CodeIt [5]. Interestingly, we see that also our
method NSA w/o TTA outperforms comparable methods
on the ARC eval set with 63 tasks solved. When using TTA
in NSA performance is pushed even further.
It is noteworthy, that our approach has similar perfor-
mance on both train and test set, while most other methods
do significantly better on the training set. Possibly this is
due to the nature of the ARGAe DSL, which seems to in-
clude transformations that help solve tasks in both evaluate
and train.
We can also see the trade-off between more expressive
DSL vs. more required compute time for the combinato-
rial search in ARGAe play out differently for train and eval.
ARGAe performance is drastically reduced on the train set
as compared to plain ARGA. It seems that the increased rep-
resentational capacity has not helped, but rather made the
combinatorial search more difficult, thus leading to a lower
number of found transformations. On the eval set, the sit-
uation is reversed, with increased representational capacity
not hindering the search process as much. NSA overcomes
this trade-off by limiting the search space while retaining
ARGAe’s representational capacity.
While TTA gives a significant boost, there is a trade-off
between computation spent on the combinatorial search vs.
more fine-tuning. In our experince it pays most to invest
compute into fine-tuning. We have observed that perfor-
mance gains do not plateau after one or two fine-tuning it-
erations but can continue up to 15 epochs. Investing more
time in data generation and fine-tuning enhances prediction
accuracy and increases the likelihood that the transformer
identifies the correct transformation primitive.
This ap-
proach allows our search engine to prioritize finding the cor-
rect transformation among the most probable predictions.
We find it especially beneficial to prioritize fine-tuning over
allocating more time to task-solving.
Correspondingly, the data-generation and fine-tuning
time for each task amounts to around 22 minutes. The av-
erage time spent on data generation, fine tuning and task
solving for NSA is included in Figure 5.
Data Generation
Fine-Tuning
Task Solving
0
3
6
9
12
15
18
21
Time (minutes)
4.35
18.15
0.95
Figure 5. Comparison of the execution times of NSA’s three com-
ponents: Data Generation, Fine-Tuning, and Task Solving. We
averaged the results across all subsets of tasks we solved.
NSA Components Ablations
In Table 2 we further ex-
amine the necessity of our two key components:
• Narrowing the search space by proposal generation
through transformer guided search and
• Test-time adaptation (TTA) during inference.
We see that transformer guided search without TTA, i.e.
NSA w/o TTA improves upon ARGAe 8-fold on the train
set and almost 3-fold on the eval set. Additionally using
TTA in our method NSA further improves by 62% on the
train set and by 20% on the exal set as compared to no TTA
with our method NSA w/o TTA.

TTA Ablations
We analyze the importance of how long
to train and how many data to train on during TTA fine-
tuning. For both ablations we take 50 random tasks over-
all, such that for 25 of those we can predict the necessary
transformation primitives without TTA, while for the rest
we cannot do so.
First, we analyze the influence of the number of TTA
epochs on the overall results by evaluating models with 0, 1,
5, 10, and 15 TTA epochs in Figure 6. For this experiment,
we provide two metrics:
• Prediction Inclusion - This metric indicates whether the
true transformation primitives lie within the set of pro-
posed ones. It is essential to assess whether the trans-
former, after TTA, can correctly predict the transforma-
tion primitives at all.
• Prediction Rank - This metric calculates whether the true
transformation primitive has been predicted as most prob-
able (rank 1), second most probable (rank 2) and so on.
Prediction rank is crucial because the search engine prior-
itizes the most probable transformation primitive first; if
the true transformation ranks low, the search may become
harder.
As shown in Figure 6, the average prediction rank does
not change much across all TTA epochs. However, the num-
ber of tasks solved fluctuates with different counts of TTA
epochs. Notably, some more difficult tasks yield correct
predictions only when using 15 TTA epochs, while eas-
ier ones often require just 1 TTA epoch for a correct pre-
diction. Prioritizing the total number of solved tasks, we
choose 15 fine-tuning epochs for our experiments. This fig-
ure also highlights the importance of TTA, as even a sin-
gle epoch significantly boosts the number of tasks with cor-
rectly predicted transformation primitives from 50% to 88%
compared to using no TTA on the ablation tasks.
0
1
5
10
15
Number of Adaptation Epochs
Values
5.0
1.8
1.7
1.7
1.8
50%
88%
88%
90%
94%
Prediction Rank
Predicted Inclusion
Figure 6. Prediction Rank and Predicted Inclusion with respect to
different TTA Epochs on 50 tasks. Each TTA model was trained
using 2500 generated samples.
Second, in Figure 7 we examine the effect of varying the
number of TTA training tasks on Prediction Rank and Pre-
dicted Inclusion. We tested sample sizes of 100, 500, 1500,
and 2500, along with a baseline comparison of no TTA (de-
noted as 0 samples in the figure). The results show that
after 500 epochs Predicted Inclusion stabilizes at 88%. Us-
ing only 100 already significantly outperforms no TTA, but
does not saturate yet. As the number of TTA samples in-
creases, Prediction Rank improves steadily, suggesting that
a larger sample count enables the transformer to make more
accurate predictions.
0
100
500
1500
2500
Number of Samples Used for TTA
Values
5.0
2.4
2.0
1.9
1.7
50%
74%
88%
88%
88%
Prediction Rank
Predicted Inclusion
Figure 7. Prediction Rank and Predicted Inclusion with respect
to different number of samples used in TTA for 50 ablation tasks.
Each TTA model was estimated for 5 epochs.
5. Conclusion
We have presented a neuro-symbolic approach for ARC
challenge. We show that combining abstraction capabili-
ties of hand-designed DSLs with a learned proposal gener-
ation outperforms comparable purely hand-designed search
as well as pure ML methods. One immediate approach is to
scale up both the DSL by increasing its representational ca-
pacity even more and equally increase the transformer net-
work for the proposal generation, e.g. by using pre-trained
LLMs and generating larger amounts of training data. How-
ever, this approach would soon require more compute than
can be provided in 30 minutes. Another idea is to use sev-
eral iterations for guessing the correct transformation, iter-
atively improving the current transformation candidate by
inspecting where errors occurred, analoguously to LLM ap-
proaches [29].
6. Acknowledgments
We extend our gratitude to Adrian Kosmala for his insight-
ful contributions to the project discussions.
References
[1] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama
Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo

Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal
Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.08774, 2023. 3
[2] James Ainooson, Deepayan Sanyal, Joel P Michelson,
Yuan Yang, and Maithilee Kunda. An approach for
solving tasks on the abstract reasoning corpus. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.09425, 2023. 1, 3, 4, 6, 7
[3] Ekin Aky¨urek, Mehul Damani, Linlu Qiu, Han Guo,
Yoon Kim, and Jacob Andreas.
The surprising ef-
fectiveness of test-time training for abstract reasoning.
2024. 3, 6
[4] Simon Alford, Anshula Gandhi, Akshay Rangamani,
Andrzej Banburski, Tony Wang, Sylee Dandekar, John
Chin, Tomaso Poggio, and Peter Chin. Neural-guided,
bidirectional program search for abstraction and rea-
soning. In Complex Networks & Their Applications
X: Volume 1, Proceedings of the Tenth International
Conference on Complex Networks and Their Applica-
tions COMPLEX NETWORKS 2021 10, pages 657–
668. Springer, 2022. 3
[5] Natasha Butt, Blazej Manczak, Auke Wiggers, Cor-
rado Rainone, David Zhang, Micha¨el Defferrard, and
Taco Cohen. Codeit: Self-improving language mod-
els with prioritized hindsight replay. In International
Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2024. 3, 6,
7
[6] Lili Chen, Kevin Lu, Aravind Rajeswaran, Kimin Lee,
Aditya Grover, Misha Laskin, Pieter Abbeel, Aravind
Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. Decision transformer:
Reinforcement learning via sequence modeling. Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems, 34:
15084–15097, 2021. 3
[7] Franc¸ois Chollet.
On the measure of intelligence,
2019. 1, 3, 4, 6
[8] Alexey
Dosovitskiy,
Lucas
Beyer,
Alexander
Kolesnikov,
Dirk
Weissenborn,
Xiaohua
Zhai,
Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias
Minderer,
Georg Heigold,
Sylvain Gelly,
Jakob
Uszkoreit, and Neil Houlsby.
An image is worth
16x16 words:
Transformers for image recognition
at scale.
In International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2021. 3
[9] Kevin Ellis, Lionel Wong, Maxwell Nye, Mathias
Sable-Meyer, Luc Cary, Lore Anaya Pozo, Luke He-
witt, Armando Solar-Lezama, and Joshua B Tenen-
baum.
Dreamcoder: growing generalizable, inter-
pretable knowledge with wake–sleep bayesian pro-
gram learning.
Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society A, 381(2251):20220050, 2023. 3
[10] S´ebastien Ferr´e. First steps of an approach to the arc
challenge based on descriptive grid models and the
minimum description length principle. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.00848, 2021. 6, 7
[11] S´ebastien Ferr´e. Tackling the abstraction and reason-
ing corpus (arc) with object-centric models and the
mdl principle. In International Symposium on Intel-
ligent Data Analysis, pages 3–15. Springer, 2024. 1,
3, 4, 7
[12] Ryan Greenblatt. Getting 50% (sota) on ARC-AGI
with GPT-4o, 2024. 3, 6
[13] Michael Hodel. Domain specific language for the ab-
straction and reasoning corpus (arc-dsl). https://
github.com/michaelhodel/arc-dsl, 2023.
3, 4
[14] Michael Hodel. Re-arc: Reverse-engineering the ab-
straction and reasoning corpus. https://github.
com/michaelhodel/re-arc, 2024. 3
[15] Aysja Johnson, Wai Keen Vong, Brenden M Lake, and
Todd M Gureckis. Fast and flexible: Human program
induction in abstract reasoning tasks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2103.05823, 2021. 2
[16] Victor Kolev, Bogdan Georgiev, and Svetlin Penkov.
Neural abstract reasoner, 2020. 3
[17] Chao Lei, Nir Lipovetzky, and Krista A Ehinger. Gen-
eralized planning for the abstraction and reasoning
corpus. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, pages 20168–20175, 2024. 1, 4
[18] Wenhao
Li,
Yudong
Xu,
Scott
Sanner,
and
Elias Boutros Khalil.
Tackling the abstraction
and reasoning corpus with vision transformers: the
importance of 2d representation,
positions,
and
objects. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06405, 2024. 3, 6
[19] Suvir Mirchandani, Fei Xia, Pete Florence, Brian
Ichter, Danny Driess, Montserrat Gonzalez Arenas,
Kanishka Rao, Dorsa Sadigh, and Andy Zeng. Large
language models as general pattern machines, 2023.
1, 3, 6, 7
[20] Melanie Mitchell, Alessandro B Palmarini, and Ar-
seny Moskvichev. Comparing humans, gpt-4, and gpt-
4v on abstraction and reasoning tasks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.09247, 2023. 1, 3
[21] Arseny Moskvichev, Victor Vikram Odouard, and
Melanie Mitchell. The conceptarc benchmark: Eval-
uating understanding and generalization in the arc do-
main. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07141, 2023. 4
[22] OpenAI and Aaron Hurst et al. GPT-4o system card.
2024. 3
[23] Jaehyun Park, Jaegyun Im, Sanha Hwang, Mintaek
Lim, Sabina Ualibekova, Sejin Kim, and Sundong
Kim. Unraveling the arc puzzle: Mimicking human
solutions with object-centric decision transformer,
2023. 3
[24] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter
Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti

Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-
tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288,
2023. 3
[25] A Vaswani. Attention is all you need. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017. 6
[26] Ruocheng Wang, Eric Zelikman, Gabriel Poesia,
Yewen Pu, Nick Haber, and Noah Goodman.
Hy-
pothesis search: Inductive reasoning with language
models. In The Twelfth International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2024. 3
[27] Yudong Xu, Elias B Khalil, and Scott Sanner. Graphs,
constraints, and search for the abstraction and reason-
ing corpus. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, pages 4115–4122, 2023. 1, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7
[28] Yudong Xu, Wenhao Li, Pashootan Vaezipoor, Scott
Sanner, and Elias B Khalil.
Llms and the abstrac-
tion and reasoning corpus: Successes, failures, and
the importance of object-based representations. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.18354, 2023. 1, 3, 4
[29] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak
Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React:
Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629, 2022. 8